\documentclass[Royal,times,doublespace,sageh]{sagej}

\usepackage{moreverb,url,natbib, multirow, tabularx}
\usepackage[colorlinks,bookmarksopen,bookmarksnumbered,citecolor=red,urlcolor=red]{hyperref}



% tightlist command for lists without linebreak
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}

% From pandoc table feature
\usepackage{longtable,booktabs,array}
\usepackage{calc} % for calculating minipage widths
% Correct order of tables after \paragraph or \subparagraph
\usepackage{etoolbox}
\makeatletter
\patchcmd\longtable{\par}{\if@noskipsec\mbox{}\fi\par}{}{}
\makeatother
% Allow footnotes in longtable head/foot
\IfFileExists{footnotehyper.sty}{\usepackage{footnotehyper}}{\usepackage{footnote}}
\makesavenoteenv{longtable}


\usepackage[left]{lineno}
\linenumbers
\usepackage{xcolor}


\begin{document}


\setcitestyle{aysep={,}}

\title{The Influence of Fluvial and Glacial Watershed Dynamics on
Holocene Sediment Accumulation in Cariboo Lake, Columbia Mountains,
British Columbia, Canada}

\runninghead{Cebulski \emph{et al}.}

\author{A. Cebulski*\affilnum{1,2}, J. Desloges\affilnum{2}}

\affiliation{\affilnum{1}{Centre for Hydrology, University of
Saskatchewan, Canmore, Canada}\\\affilnum{2}{Department of Geography and
Department of Earth Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada}}

\corrauth{Alex Cebulski}

\email{\href{mailto:alexcebulski@gmail.com}{\nolinkurl{alexcebulski@gmail.com}}}

\begin{abstract}
An acoustic record of sedimentation and sediment cores from Cariboo Lake
are analyzed to present a high-resolution record of sediment
accumulation. Acoustically penetrable sediment reaches a maximum
thickness of 35 m in deep parts of the lake, representing deglacial and
Holocene accumulation. A transition from massive to well-layered
sediments is observed in the sub-bottom acoustic record during final
phases of valley deglaciation in the region (ca. 10.5-9 ka BP).
\textbf{The timing of this transition is inferred from the sediment core
chronology proximal to the acoustic transects.} Fine clastic sediments
produced from the glaciated headwaters are delivered by Cariboo River as
over-flow currents into the lake which produce bimodal rhythmic layering
of silt and clay sediments. Laminae couplets are inferred to be
deposited annually according to two AMS radiocarbon dates and a varve
counting chronology. Two long cores, 2.9 and 3.8 m in length, were
selected for analysis with estimated basal dates of 2 ka BP. The
accumulation of sediment into Cariboo Lake shows above average sediment
accumulation rates between 0-700CE and 1500-2017CE which are coincident
with cool temperatures and peak glacier extents. Cariboo Lake is
situated in the northern Columbia Mountains, British Columbia, Canada
and is representative of environments transitioning from semi-arid
interior climates to glaciated high mountain regions to the east. The
sediment chronology presented in this study contributes to the existing
body of knowledge of lake sediment accumulation and Holocene watershed
activity for this transitional climate region of western Canada.
\end{abstract}

\keywords{Glaciolacustrine; Sediment; Holocene; Connectivity; Varve;
British Columbia}

\maketitle

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

Environmental proxies that extend back beyond the modern observable
record are crucial to understanding earth system processes
\citep{Turney2019, Huber2012, Nelson2016}. Proxy reconstructions at the
sub-annual scale (e.g.~ice cores, tree rings, and corals), to
multi-decadal scales (e.g.~sediments, pollen, boreholes) have proven
useful in describing past environmental conditions across the globe
\citep{Masson2013}. In the case of sedimentary sequences collected from
climate sensitive glaciated watersheds, they have been important in
contributing to the regional understanding of climate and hydrologic
variability over the Holocene. \textbf{For example, researchers have
utilized sedimentary sequences along with other environmental proxy
methods to provide regional \citep{Menounos2009b} and global
\citep{Neukom2019} reconstructions of hydroclimatic change over the
Holocene.}

Climatic variability in western Canada over the Holocene contributed to
several fluctuations in glacial activity with implications for sediment
accumulation in glacier-fed lakes. Multi-proxy analyses of lake
sediments from Vancouver Island \citep{Brown2006}, south central British
Columbia \citep{Lowe1997} and northern Washington State
\citep{Steinman2019} suggest low lake levels and precipitation amounts
during the early Holocene around 11.0 to 7.50 ka. \textbf{In the
southern Coast Mountains \citep{Menounos2004, Koch2007a, Osborn2007} and
Canadian Rocky Mountains \citep{Luckman1988, Luckman1993, Luckman1993a}
glacier extents were generally reduced during the early Holocene
relative to late Holocene extents. During the Early Neoglacial
(7.50-5.00 ka), a relatively small expansion of glaciers is reported in
the south Coast Mountains
\citep{Osborn2007, Filippelli2006, Ryder1986, Harvey2012} and in the
Interior ranges and Rocky Mountains \citep{Luckman1993}.} During the
Early-middle Neoglacial (5.00-3.50 ka), there is widespread evidence of
at least two glacial advances across western Canada from material dated
in glacial forefields and glacier-fed lakes
\citep{Koch2007a, Osborn2007, Menounos2008c, Gardner1985, Wood2004, Hodder2006b, Desloges1999, Leonard1999}.
\textbf{During the Middle-late Neoglacial (3.50-1.00 ka), two periods of
glacier advance have been reported. In the central and eastern ranges of
Canada, extensive glacier coverage around 3.5-2.77 ka and 1.8-1.5 ka is
inferred from lacustrine sediment records
\citep{Leonard1999, Leonard1997, Dirszowsky1997a, Desloges1999} and log
and stump material \citep{Wood2004, Luckman1995, Luckman1999}. Glacier
advances during the Little Ice Age (LIA) have been reported as broadly
synchronous from Alaska to Patagonia \citep{Luckman2000g}. In the
Canadian Rocky Mountains many glaciers reached peak glacier extents
during the LIA, centered around 1250 CE
\citep{Luckman1995, Osborn2001, Leonard1997} and 1850 CE
\citep{Luckman2000g, Leonard1997}. There is general regional agreement
on the timing and magnitude of the large Early Holocene retreat and Late
Holocene LIA advance; however, the smaller fluctuations that occurred
between these large events have less regional agreement
\citep{Menounos2009b}.}

In the western Cordillera of Canada, sedimentary sequences have been
collected to better understand the hydroclimatic and glacial history of
the Coast Mountains \citep{Menounos2008c}, St.~Elias Mountains
\citep{Crookshanks2008}, Monashee Mountains \citep{Hodder2006b}, and
Rocky Mountains \citep{Leonard1986, Dirszowsky1997a, Desloges1999}.
\textbf{A study by \citet{Gilbert2012} of Quesnel Lake (272
km\textsuperscript{2}), 30 km south of the study area examined here,
found high rates of sediment accumulation around 10.4 ka BP during the
early Holocene deglacial environment, and around 8.4 ka BP sediment
accumulation declined significantly. Meaningful trends in organic matter
and grain size of Quesnel Lake sediment sequences at a sub-millennial
time scale were not detectable. Quesnel Lake is very large relative to
the contributing watershed and therefore the sediment system exhibited
very low accumulation rates and is much less sensitive to climate
variability.} Within the Cariboo Lake basin, \citet{Maurer2012b}
investigated On-off Lake which remained intermittently connected to the
Castle Creek Glacier on the basin divide (Figure \ref{fig:map-basin}).
Currently the Castle Creek Glacier resides outside of the Cariboo Lake
basin however \citet{Maurer2012b} provide evidence that the glacier
advanced across the hydrological divide and into the Cariboo Lake basin
several times over the Holocene. Advances of the Castle Creek Glacier
into the Cariboo Lake basin occurred around around 4.96-4.45, 2.73-2.49,
1.87-1.72, and 1.54-1.42 ka BP \citep{Maurer2012b}. Both
\citet{Gilbert2012} and \citet{Maurer2012b} provide a long but coarse
resolution record of the fluvial and glacial activity of the Cariboo
Mountains. Additional high-resolution records for this transitional
climate between the wetter Coastal and dyer Rocky Mountain ranges are
needed especially for the mid to late Holocene interval where greater
regional variability in glacial responses to climate change has been
observed \citep{Menounos2009b}.

\textbf{The sensitivity and temporal resolution of lake sediment
characteristics (e.g.~varves thickness, grain size and organic content)
and their connection to regional hydrology, temperature, precipitation
patterns, and glacier extent varies amongst glacier-fed lake studies
\citep{Desloges1999, Hodder2006b, Leonard1997, Menounos2006b, Menounos2008c}.}
Mountain basins that exhibit a strong nival-hydrographic regime
typically produce distinct varve couplets with a fine-grained layer
deposited in winter when the lake ices over and flow velocity decreases
followed by a coarse-grained layer deposited during spring high flows
\citep[e.g.][]{Leonard1997, Hodder2007c, Desloges1999}. In contrast,
lakes proximal to the Coast Mountains of British Columbia typically show
greater variability in varve thickness due to the influence of frequent
and large fall rain-storms that produce multiple coarse laminations
within a single season \citep[e.g.][]{Gilbert1997, Menounos2008c}. Lakes
that are more distal from glacier sources typically have relatively
lower sediment inputs and finer grain sizes, due to the upstream
filtering of river floodplains and lakes \citep{Hodder2007c}. The effect
of this filtering can influence the climate and hydrology signals and
may contribute to a weaker signal to noise ratio and reduced sensitivity
to hydroclimatic variability \citep{Jerolmack2010}.

Establishing a correlation between seasonal or annual trends in varve
thickness, grain size, and organic content from sediment cores to local
discharge, temperature, and precipitation is not always possible for
short time scales due to complex process interactions, watershed
connectivity \textbf{and dating uncertainties}
\citep{Hodder2007c, Menounos2008c, Heideman2017}. \textbf{The linkage
between hydrology and climate drivers and the lake sediment record may
be limited at short time scales (i.e.~less than 10 years) if there is a
weak connectivity between sediment production and delivery to the lake
\citep{Hodder2007c, Menounos2008c, Heideman2017}. Trends in lake
sediment sequences are typically more representative of climate
fluctuations at longer time scales greater than 100 years as this
provides sufficient time for changes in sediment production and delivery
to propagate through the watershed
\citep{Leonard1999, Osborn2007, Heideman2017}. Shorter timescale trends
in climate change may still be reflected in lake sediment records but
with less fidelity and confidence in the chronology.}

Sediment chronologies in clastic lake sediments are typically derived
from a combination of radiocarbon dating
\citep{Gilbert2012, Hodder2006b, Steinman2019}, identification of
volcanic tephra layers \citep{Gilbert2012, Hodder2006b, Steinman2019}
and counting of visible annual laminations (varves)
\citep{Hodder2006b, Heideman2015}. The Mt. Mazama volcanic eruption is
the most prominent tephra layer typically found in sediment sequences in
western Canada \citep{Gilbert2012, Steinman2019} and has been dated to
approximately 7600 cal. BP \citep{Zdanowicz1999, Hallett1997}.
\textbf{\citet{Westgate1977} reports the most recent major volcanic ash
event to reach central BC occurred 2100 yr BP.}

Few sedimentary sequences exist in central British Columbia that provide
a high-resolution and long-term record of hydroclimatic variability
\citep{Gilbert2012, Hodder2006b, Menounos2009b, Maurer2012b}. The
sedimentary sequence from Cariboo Lake presented here, fills this gap by
providing a new record of Holocene hydroclimatic variability for the
transitional zone between the Coastal and Rocky Mountains. The purpose
of this research is to 1) establish an understanding of the mechanisms
that control the delivery and deposition of the fine sediment fraction
to Cariboo Lake, 2) to reconstruct the highest resolution and longest
possible sediment accumulation record from cores and acoustic methods
for this area of British Columbia, 3) compare and contrast the
accumulation record in this transitional (semi-arid to glaciated
mountainous) lake system with existing sedimentary sequences and
regional climate proxies in western Canada.

\hypertarget{study-area}{%
\section{Study Area}\label{study-area}}

Cariboo Lake is located in the northern foothills of the Columbia
Mountains, 85 km northeast of Williams Lake, British Columbia (Figure
\ref{fig:map-basin}). The lake receives runoff from an area of 3244
km\textsuperscript{2}, which is filtered by three deep fjord like lakes:
Issac Lake, Lanezi Lake, and Ghost Lake (Figure \ref{fig:map-basin}).
The watershed relief ranges from 2600 m asl. in the eastern headwaters
to 600 m asl. at the western Cariboo Lake outlet. The west to east, 90
km long watershed spans a precipitation gradient ranging from 1370 mm
yr\textsuperscript{-1} in the headwaters to 477 mm
yr\textsuperscript{-1} at the semi-arid outlet to the lake. The area of
Cariboo Lake is 10 km\textsuperscript{2} resulting in a lake
area-to-watershed area ratio of 0.3\%. The Cariboo Lake watershed has 64
km\textsuperscript{2} of permanent ice cover which covers 2\% of the
total watershed \citep{Bolch2008}. The most extensive glaciated terrain
is proximal to Mt. Lunn roughly 60 km upstream of Cariboo Lake (Figure
\ref{fig:map-basin}). The Cariboo Lake basin hydrology is snow- and
glacier-melt dominant with average 1971-2000 monthly runoff peaking in
June and low-flows that occur between December and March (Figure
\ref{fig:cl-hydro}, A). From December to March the air temperature is
mostly below 0 \(^{\circ}\)C and precipitation falls primarily as snow
during these months (Figure \ref{fig:cl-hydro}).

The Cariboo River, draining into the east margin of the lake, is the
main source of sediment. The lake is separated into two basins by a
large alluvial fan building cross-valley from Keithley Creek (Figure
\ref{fig:map-lake}). The surface area of the upstream basin is 8
km\textsuperscript{2} and is referred to here as the main Cariboo Lake
basin. The downstream basin, referred to here as the Keithley Creek
sub-basin, is 2 km\textsuperscript{2} in surface area. The bathymetry of
the lake reaches a maximum depth of over 50 m in two deep holes within
the central part of the main Cariboo Lake basin. These deep holes
provide some evidence of past glacial scouring and ice extents that
reached the lake.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/cl_small_scale_inset_labels_gimp} 

}

\caption{Map of the Cariboo Lake basin. Inset map shows the location of the Cariboo Lake basin within British Columbia relative to the Mud Lake basin from the Hodder et. al, (2006) study. See Figure 2 for a detailed map of Cariboo Lake.}\label{fig:map-basin}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/cariboo_combine_climate_hydro} 

}

\caption{1971-2000 monthly runoff statistics for Water Survey of Canada station 08KH003 (A) and 1971-2000 temperature and precipitation normals from Environment Canada station 1094616 (B). The top of each bar on panel C corresponds to the average monthly total precipitation and the coloured portion shows the fraction of rain or snow.}\label{fig:cl-hydro}
\end{figure}

\textbf{Lanezi Lake is a deep fjord-like lake with flat bathymetry
reaching a maximum depth of 170 m and Sandy Lake is much shallower
reaching a maximum depth of 6 m (Figure \ref{fig:map-basin}). The
Matthews River, which meets the Cariboo River below Lanezi Lake, is
filtered by Ghost Lake and provides an important connection to meltwater
sources draining several alpine glaciers including the largest area of
ice (10 km\textsuperscript{2}) in the Cariboo Lake watershed, proximal
to Roberts Peak (Figure \ref{fig:map-basin}).}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/cl_bathymetry_acoustics_coring_locations_labels} 

}

\caption{Map of the Cariboo Lake bathymetry and coring locations. Bathymetric interval is 10 m. Acoustic transects selected for analysis are shown with a black solid line and labeled A, B, C, D, E and F. Fan deltas mentioned in the text are represented by black triangles and are referenced to by the upstream creek (i.e. Frank Creek Delta is the triangle below Frank Creek). The Frank Creek fan delta separates the main Cariboo Lake and Frank Creek sub-basins. The Keithley Creek fan delta separates the Frank Creek and Keithley Creek sub-basins.}\label{fig:map-lake}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{methods}{%
\section{Methods}\label{methods}}

\hypertarget{field-methods}{%
\subsection{Field Methods}\label{field-methods}}

A field campaign was conducted during the summer of 2017 to collect
sub-bottom acoustic soundings, dredge samples, and sediment cores.
Thirty-four km of sub-bottom acoustic soundings were collected across
Cariboo Lake using a 10 kHz StrataBox 3510 HD. An Ekman dredge was used
to collect 20 samples from the lake bottom, each yielding
\textasciitilde730 cm\textsuperscript{3} of surficial sediment. The
dredge samples were sub-sampled in the field using an 80 mm diameter PVC
cylinder pushed into the block of sediment. This resulted in 20 short
cores each containing about 450 cm\textsuperscript{3} of sediment. The
Ekman dredge filled with variable depths of sediment and as a result the
short cores ranged from 6 to 12 cm in length. The remaining sediment not
captured in the PVC cylinder was kept as a bulk sediment sample. Four
long sediment cores (V1-V4) were collected using a Rossfelder
submersible vibracorer with a 6 m long 70 mm diameter aluminum pipe. The
Ekman short cores and the long vibracores were split longitudinally with
one half preserved as an archive and the other as a working half. The
working half samples were prepared for imaging by scraping the core
parallel to the sediment laminae to create a flat surface which showed
the sediment stratigraphy. The stratigraphy of long cores V1 and V2 were
selected for detailed analysis as they were located within the deepest
parts of upper Cariboo Lake. The deep mid-lake sampling locations were
important to ensure the cores consisted of a higher fraction of fine
clastic sediments from the main Cariboo River compared to coarser
sediments derived from steep valley sidewalls and turbidite flood
events. Cores V3 and V4 taken at shallower depths further down-lake had
higher fractions of coarse grained sediments and resulted in a higher
degree of core disturbance, presumably due to the lower cohesion of the
coarser grained sediments.

\hypertarget{laboratory-methods}{%
\subsection{Laboratory Methods}\label{laboratory-methods}}

The cores and short cores were analyzed for laminae thickness, organic
content, and particle size. The working halves of long cores V1 and V2
were subsampled with 2 cm\textsuperscript{3} of sediment extracted at a
5 cm interval, with additional samples taken within stratigraphic
facies. Stratigraphic \textbf{facies} were identified based on visual
changes in grain size and lamination patterns. Laminae couplets observed
on the working halves were digitally counted and measured for thickness
using the ImageJ software, by \citet{Schneider2012}. Uncertainty in
laminae counting is attributed to sections of core with indiscernible
laminae formation, core compaction, undercounting, and subjectivity in
classifying the occasionally thicker (4 to 47 mm thick) graded to
massive laminae/beds. Varve counting uncertainties in the literature are
reported as ranging between 0.7 - 6 \%
\citep{Menounos2008c, Zolitschka1991}. The uncertainty of the laminae
counting in this study was inferred from Ekman short cores (E12, E13,
E14) which had statistically similar sediment accumulation rates.
\textbf{The varve counting error was estimated by counting the number of
couplets down to a depth of 5 cm in each Ekman core. This resulted in an
average count of 11.33 couplets and a standard deviation of 1.15 between
the three short cores (see Table \ref{tab:ekErr}). The top section of
cores V1 and V2 were disturbed during coring which prevented counting
and measurement of laminae couplets in 11 cm of V1 and 7 cm of V2. The
absence of clear marker laminae and limited overlap between the long
cores and short cores prevented anchoring of the long cores to the short
cores.}

Organic content was inferred from percent weight loss-on-ignition
analysis (550 \(^{\circ}\)C) \citep{Dean1974, Smith2003}. Grain size
analysis was conducted using a Mastersizer Particle Size Analyzer 3000.
Samples were prepared following methods by \citet{Gray2010} to remove
the fine fraction of particles from organic material. This involved a
removal of organic material using three sequential alloquots of 20\%
H\textsubscript{2}0\textsubscript{2} until the sample stopped reacting.
To prevent flocculation of sediment grains the samples were dispersed in
0.05\% solution of \textbf{sodium hexametaphosphate} for 24 hours. Grain
size was measured three times for each sample, resulting in an average
standard deviation of \(\pm\) 0.01 µm.

The chronology of both vibra cores was reconstructed using AMS
\textsuperscript{14}C dating (analyzed at the Andre E. Lalonde AMS
Laboratory at the University of Ottawa) and a chronology derived from
laminae (couplet) counting on working core images. The AMS
\textsuperscript{14}C calibration was performed using Bchron, a
Baysesian statistical age-model software package for R
\citep{Parnell2008, Parnell2011, Haslett2008} and the IntCal13
calibration curve \citep{Reimer2013}.

\hypertarget{results}{%
\section{Results}\label{results}}

\hypertarget{sub-bottom-acoustics}{%
\subsection{Sub-bottom Acoustics}\label{sub-bottom-acoustics}}

Acoustic stratigraphy from six selected transects (see locations in
Figure \ref{fig:map-lake}) reveal the range of morphologies and
character of sedimentary deposits in Cariboo Lake (Figure
\ref{fig:acoustics}). Acoustic penetration is limited in transects A and
E by coarse sediments proximal to river fan-deltas across Cariboo Lake
(see triangle symbols in Figure \ref{fig:map-lake} for fan-delta
locations). Acoustic signal penetration, resolution and distinctive
acoustic layering improves significantly along the thalweg of the lake
bottom away from the main Cariboo River delta and in cross-lake
transects more distal from the valley-side fan-deltas. The diagnal lines
across all panels (cross-hatching) in Figure \ref{fig:acoustics} is
observed over most of the acoustic record due to errant electrical
interference from the research vessel that could not be resolved.
However, the interference does not affect the overall quality of the
acoustic results in the six selected transects (Figure
\ref{fig:acoustics}, A-F).

Transect A, one kilometer southwest of the headwater Cariboo River
delta, has a strong acoustic reflector at the sediment-water interface
indicating the presence of coarser-grained material on the lakebed
(Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, A). Grab samples on this transect show a
high fraction of sandy materials which act as an acoustic mask limiting
the penetration of the acoustic signal to a depth of 1-2 m. An acoustic
multiple (echo) is observed 45 m below the sediment surface caused by
the limited penetration at the surface (Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, A -
i). Acoustically penetrable, well-layered sediment is observed 3.5 km
from the Cariboo River delta in transect B (Figure \ref{fig:acoustics},
B). This site is proximal to long core V1. Acoustic reflectors with 1-2
m separation lie conformably over a hummocky basement which is observed
on the south side of the transect (Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, B - i).
The acoustic basement drops off below the observable record near the
south channel-like depression. Well structured layering extends across
the south side of the transect but pinches out towards the north shore
(Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, B, C \& D). On the south side of transect
B, the thickness of the well structured layering ranges from 10 to 20 m.
Underlying the layered sediments is a more massively layered facies
which ranges from 12 to 25 m thick before the record is cut off
\textbf{at 80 m; the maximum depth of the acoustic record.}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/acoustics_6_panel} 

}

\caption{Panel of six selected sub-bottom acoustic transects A, B, C, D, E, and F. The left-hand side of each transect corresponds to the north-shore of the lake, see Figure 2 for location of each transect. Transect A and B: Acoustic echo (multiple) is denoted by (i). Transect C: (i) denotes inferred bedrock or coarse late-glacial material. (ii) and (iii) are v-notch scour channels. (A) and (B) are sediment facies. Transect D: Scour channels are denoted by (i) and (ii). Slumping is observed at (iii).}\label{fig:acoustics}
\end{figure}

Acoustic penetration increases 4.5 km from the Cariboo River delta at
transect C (Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, C). The acoustic record along
this transect reaches a maximum sediment thickness of 35 m in two
troughs, the maximum thickness of surficial sediments observed across
Cariboo Lake in this study. The acoustic basement is
\textbf{interpreted} to be either bedrock or coarse-grained glacial
sediment from the Last Glacial Maximum (Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, C --
i). Two sediment facies are observed across this transect based on
geometry and the strength and continuity of reflectors. Some disruption
of these facies is caused by slumping of side slopes (e.g.~north end of
transect C). The lower unit, facies A, has a thickness of
\textasciitilde12 m along undisturbed sections (Figure
\ref{fig:acoustics}, C) and is more massive to weakly acoustically
layered. The contact with overlying sediment above facies A appears to
be conformable at the south end and middle of the transect but
unconformable in other places. The unconformities are most apparent in
the two sharp crested v-notch channels at the middle of the transect.
These channels are a continuation of those noted in transect B. These
are \textbf{interpreted} to be scour channels formed by erosive, higher
energy, turbidity currents that probably date to deglaciation of the
lake basin. \textbf{Facies A is comprised of a lighter grey tone
representing coarse-grained sediment and lacks parallel reflectors
indicating a higher energy and more rapid deposition of coarser
lacustrine sediment. Facies B begins with high-amplitude parallel
reflectors with 2-3 m separation and conforms well with facies A below
(Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, C). Facies B has a thickness of
\textasciitilde10 m along undisturbed sections and deepens to a maximum
of 13 m within the scour channels (Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, C - ii \&
iii). The shift from massively layered sediment in facies A to distinct
parallel reflectors in facies B is interpreted to represent a transition
from a continuous high energy deglacial environment in facies A to a
more episodic deposition of coarse-grained sediment during high flows in
facies B.}

The two buried troughs in transect C (Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, C -
ii, iii) are significant and best expressed in this area of the lake.
The north trough (ii) appears to be a depression that was continuously
infilled by facies A and then B. Hence it most likely represents an
older pre-existing feature. The sediments in the southern trough (iii)
are interesting in that a wedge of sediment infill seems to be an
unconformable deposit with both facies B below and facies A above. This
wedge of sediment is observed in Figure \ref{fig:acoustics} (see above
label C-iii) characterized by a deepening of facies B and darker in
colour than facies A. It is likely that an erosional channel developed
after or in the later stages of facies A deposition which infilled the
wedge. Sedimentation of the wedge was then truncated by the onset of the
facies B sediment. While the two troughs might have been active at the
same time during deglaciation, only the southern trough was reactivated
later and infilled with sediment prior to the onset of facies B
deposition.

Transect D, to the northeast of the Frank Creek delta has well-layered
sediments in the top 5-10 m and transitions to poor acoustic penetration
below this (Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, D). The parallel reflectors
observed in the uppermost sediment layers of transect D have a thickness
of 2-3 m and have a higher amplitude compared to facies B in transect C.
Some slumping of sidewall sediments is observed on the south sidewall
(Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}, D).

Southwest of the Frank Creek fan-delta, acoustic reflectors along
transect E show a decline in reflectance and a decrease in layer
thickness to \textless{} 1 m. Acoustic masking from coarse grained
sediment occurs at depths of 2-4 m along the south margin (Figure
\ref{fig:acoustics}, E). Total sediment thickness of finer, acoustically
well-layered material along the north bench is significant approaching
10 m. The profile suggests that much of the suspended sediment
transported from the upper lake does not make it past the shallow lake
depths (\textless{} 20 m) of the sill at the Frank Creek fan-delta apart
from the northern most part of the transect. Coarser sediment from the
Frank Creek fan-delta dominates the south side of the transect and fine
sediment deposition is restricted, or forced, to the north side.

Similar to the Frank Creek fan-delta, the very shallow sill of less than
2 m opposite the Keithley Creek prograding fan-delta significantly
reduces sediment connectivity to the main Cariboo Lake basin (see
triangle proximal to Keithley Creek in Figure \ref{fig:map-lake}).
Transect F, located close to the centre of the Keithley Creek sub-basin
shows a maximum observable sediment thickness of 4 m concentrated in the
basin thalweg (Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}). Below this there is acoustic
masking by coarser sediment. The acoustic reflectors within the top 4 m
of transect F are acoustically penetrable, well layered and are
conformable to the basin morphology. These reflectors are of higher
amplitude compared to those in transect E and are thicker at 1-2 m. This
suggests that significant amounts of coarse-grained sediments are found
in this part of the lake, likely originating from the high energy
Keithley Creek drainage basin. Fine faction sediments from the main
Cariboo Lake are expected to make up a small percentage as transport
into this sub-basin is limited by up-lake storage, filtering and
hypopycnal overpassing.

\hypertarget{spatial}{%
\subsection{Spatial Trends in Surficial Sediment}\label{spatial}}

Twenty surficial sediment cores ranging from 6-12 cm thick were analyzed
for grain size, laminae thickness, and organic content. These samples
were collected following a longitudinal transect down Cariboo Lake and
indicate how sediment flux varies with distance from the Cariboo River
delta (see Figure \ref{fig:map-lake}, for sampling locations).
\textbf{The percent of sand-sized sediments follows an exponential
decline with distance down-lake starting at 60.8\% sand proximal to the
Cariboo River delta and reaching a low of 0.15\%, 5.2 km from the
Cariboo River delta (Figure \ref{fig:ekmanSeds}, A). The
D\textsubscript{50} grain size also follows a steep decline from 89.9
µm, 300 m from the delta, to 31.3 µm 550 m from the Cariboo River delta
(Figure \ref{fig:ekmanSeds}, B). The decline in D\textsubscript{90}
grain size follows a more pronounced decline, while the
D\textsubscript{10} remains largely unchanged. This suggests that larger
sand-sized sediments (63-2000 µm) are sensitive to distance from fan
deltas, while smaller silt-sized (2-63 µm) and clay-sized (0.01-2 µm)
sediments are less sensitive. At distances greater than 2 km from the
Cariboo River delta the fraction of silt-sized sediments remains at over
80\%, aside from core E16 which is near the Frank Creek fan-delta. The
highest percent of silt (86.5-89.6\%) and clay (9.3-14.4\%) sized
sediments are observed between 3 and 6.5 km from the Cariboo River
delta, proximal to the long core sampling locations.} Near to the Frank
Creek fan-delta the D\textsubscript{50} grain size nearly doubles in
size from 7.92 µm at 6.4 km to 15.1 µm at 7.35 km from the Cariboo River
delta. In the Keithley Creek sub-basin the D\textsubscript{50} grain
size has an average grain size of 15.9 µm (n = 3) and the composition of
sediment is 4.0\% clay, 85.8\% silt, and 10.2\% sand (Figure
\ref{fig:ekmanSeds}, A, B).

Proximal to the Cariboo River delta (\textless{} 500 m) the structure of
the surficial sediments exhibits massive layering, erosive contacts and
the fraction of sand grains in these samples is greater than 60\%. A
sand-bed with a thickness of 1 cm is observed in the bulk sample closest
to the Cariboo River delta (Figure \ref{fig:ekmanImgs}, A). In the main
Cariboo River basin, core E13 \textbf{had the most distinct laminations}
and was taken 5.24 km from the Cariboo River delta, proximal to long
core V2, in the deepest part at a depth of 40 m. Sediment here shows
rhythmic lamination (Figure \ref{fig:ekmanImgs}, B).

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/ekman_seds} 

}

\caption{Sediment characteristics from the Ekman surficial bulk samples with distance down lake from the Cariboo River input to Cariboo Lake. Top panel A is the percent clay (0.01 - 2) µm, silt (2 - 63) µm, and sand grains (63 - 2000) µm, panel B is the  D~10~, D~50~, and D~90~ (µm) grain size, panel C is the mean laminae thickness (mm), and the bottom panel D is percent organic matter content (OM).}\label{fig:ekmanSeds}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/ekman_example} 

}

\caption{Selected surficial Ekman sediment core photographs. A (E1) is proximal to the Cariboo River delta (0.3 km down lake). B (E13) was retrieved from the second deepest basin in the lake in the Cariboo River basin (5.24 km down lake). C (E18) was retrieved from the Keithley Creek sub-basin (29.53 km down lake).}\label{fig:ekmanImgs}
\end{figure}

Sediment cores E9-E15 and E18-E20, retrieved from areas in Cariboo Lake
that are distal from river deltas and have lake depths of 30-50 m, have
a high fraction of silt and clay sediment and exhibit a sequence of
fine-grained dark layers followed by coarse-grained light layers (Figure
\ref{fig:ekmanImgs}, B \& C). The sediment stratigraphy observed within
cores E9-E15 and E18-E20 is similar to annual laminations (also called
varves) \textbf{which occurs in lakes that have sufficient seasonal
variation in river discharge and lake stratification}
\citep{Cockburn2008, Zolitschka2015a, Heideman2015, Hodder2006b, Desloges1999}.
In the Cariboo Lake basin, winter low flows, lake-ice cover, and lake
stratification reduce the velocity of lake currents and contribute to
the deposition of fine-grained sediments on the lake bottom. During
spring snowmelt high flows, coarser-grained sediments are deposited as a
result of higher energy lake currents. \textbf{Additional deposits of
coarse-grained sediment also may result due to abnormally high discharge
events caused by as large rainfall events, rain-on-snow, rapid melt of
glaciers and snowpack during heat waves, and/or turbidite beds due to
delta collapse} \citep{sabatier2022}. Coastal lakes in western Canada
that are frequented by large rain-storms and mid-winter melt events lead
to multiple laminae couplets deposited in a given year
\citep{Menounos2008c}. However, the distinct spring snowmelt-dominant
hydrological regime of the Cariboo Lake watershed suggests the deposit
of multiple coarse-grained laminae in one year is rare (Figure
\ref{fig:cl-hydro}). Coarse-grained deposits are still possible in
Cariboo Lake due to turbidite beds from delta slumping/foreset failures
however these turbidite beds are only observed in Ekman cores proximal
to Cariboo Lake river deltas (e.g.~Figure \ref{fig:ekmanImgs}, A). While
the sediment stratigraphy of Ekman cores E9-E15 and E18-E20 resemble
varves, further analysis of the Cariboo Lake long-cores and C14
chronology \textbf{are used to confirm this}.

The thickness of sediment laminae couplets within cores E9-E15 and
E18-E20 demonstrate a gradual decreasing trend with distance down-lake
from the Cariboo River delta (Figure \ref{fig:ekmanSeds}, B). This
suggests the Cariboo River is the main source of sediment into Cariboo
Lake as sediment flux typically declines with distance from the primary
sediment source. Maximum couplet thickness has an average of 4.7 mm (n =
6) in the Cariboo River basin and 7.9 mm (n = 3) in the Keithley Creek
sub-basin. In the Cariboo River basin, maximum couplet thickness
decreases by 0.62 mm/km and by 2.17 mm/km in the Keithley Creek
sub-basin with distance down-lake (Figure \ref{fig:ekmanSeds}, B). The
decline in thickness is more rapid in the Keithley Creek sub-basin is
likely due to additional local inputs of coarser grained sediment coming
from the Keithley Creek tributary.

Trends in percent organic matter (OM) of surficial sediment cores were
not found to exhibit systematic patterns with distance down-lake (Figure
\ref{fig:ekmanSeds}, C). \textbf{The lowest OM values were observed in
the Keithley Creek sub-basin and suggest higher levels of clastic
sediment yield in this basin which dilutes the OM signal.}

The results from particle size, laminae thickness, and percent organics
\textbf{supports the hypothesis that} sediment delivered from the main
Cariboo River is the primary source of sediment to Cariboo Lake. Massive
layering of sediment and coarse-grained particle sizes are limited to
areas proximal to Pine Creek, Frank Creek and Keithley Creek deltas
where localized turbidity currents are active. Outside of these areas,
where turbidity currents and bedload transport processes are reduced,
the sediment in Cariboo Lake is largely comprised of rhythmically
laminated silt and clay sediments likely transported primarily through
suspended sediment processes from the main Cariboo River. In the
Keithley Creek sub-basin grain size and laminae structures are larger in
size than those observed in the main Cariboo River basin suggesting
local sediment inputs from the Keithley Creek are significant (Figure
\ref{fig:ekmanImgs}, C).

\hypertarget{sediment-accumulation-chronology}{%
\subsection{Sediment Accumulation
Chronology}\label{sediment-accumulation-chronology}}

Four vibra sediment cores, ranging from 2 -- 4 m in length, were
retrieved from the deepest portions of Cariboo Lake (Figure
\ref{fig:map-lake}). Cores V1 (3 m) and V2 (4 m) in the main Cariboo
River basin were selected for detailed analysis as these two cores had
organic material for AMS radiocarbon dating, and their sediment
stratigraphy was well preserved. The chronology of the two cores is
provided by \textbf{two} AMS radiocarbon dates and laminae counting. A
search for volcanic tephra was made through careful magnified inspection
of visual colour changes. None were found using this method.
\citet{Westgate1977}, \citet{Hallett1997} and \citet{Maurer2012b}
indicate that this area of British Columbia has had episodic volcanic
ash inputs from significant eruptions that predate 2100 years BP but
nothing since.

\hypertarget{chronology}{%
\subsubsection{Chronology}\label{chronology}}

Organic material for dating in the clastic dominated cores was extremely
limited. AMS radiocarbon dates obtained for cores V1 and V2 are
presented in Table \ref{tab:amsDates} and provide limited temporal
control and evidence of sediment accumulation rates for the long cores.
A small twig from V1 at 343 cm and combination of a \textbf{conifer
needle and twig} which were combined into one sample at V2, with an
average depth of 281 cm, yielding a calibrated \citep{Reimer2013}
two-sigma date range of 1820-1918 cal BP and 1895-2043 cal BP
respectively. Figure \ref{fig:amsRates} shows the \textsuperscript{14}C
chronology for V1 and V2 compared to the laminae couplet chronologies
for E13, V1, and V2. The \textsuperscript{14}C dates from samples V1 and
V2 yield accumulation rates of 1.76 \(\pm\) 0.05 mm
yr\textsuperscript{-1} and 1.37 \(\pm\) 0.05 mm yr\textsuperscript{-1}
respectively.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 12\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0926}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 12\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0741}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 12\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1019}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 12\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1296}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 12\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1481}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 12\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2685}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 12\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1852}}@{}}
\caption{Cariboo Lake chronologic control points. Note that the 2-sigma
and median ages shown here are based on
IntCal13.\label{tab:amsDates}}\tabularnewline
\toprule()
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Core Name
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Type
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Depth (cm)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
\textsuperscript{14}C (yr BP)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
\textsuperscript{14}C 1\(\sigma\)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
2\(\sigma\) age range (cal BP)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Median age (cal BP)
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule()
\endfirsthead
\toprule()
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Core Name
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Type
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Depth (cm)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
\textsuperscript{14}C (yr BP)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
\textsuperscript{14}C 1\(\sigma\)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
2\(\sigma\) age range (cal BP)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Median age (cal BP)
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule()
\endhead
V1 & Surface & 0 & NA & NA & NA & -67 \\
V1 & 14C & 343 & 1913 & 21 & 1820-1918 & 1859 \\
V2 & Surface & 0 & NA & NA & NA & -67 \\
V2 & 14C & 281 & 2020 & 28 & 1895-2043 & 1967 \\
\bottomrule()
\end{longtable}

Ekman surficial core 13 (E13) is most proximal to the V2 long core (see
Figure \ref{fig:map-lake}) and exhibits similar sediment accumulation
compared to the \textsuperscript{14}C and laminae chronology of V2
(Figure \ref{fig:amsRates}). The light-dark couplets in E13, are similar
to annual deposits noted in dozens of other lakes throughout BC
\citep[e.g.][]{Hodder2006b} (Figure \ref{fig:ekmanImgs}). Therefore, the
couplets within the Ekman cores are assumed to closely approximate
varves, in which case E13 exhibits an average accumulation rate of 1.98
\(\pm\) 0.19 mm yr\textsuperscript{-1}. Higher accumulation rates are
expected for the Ekman samples as they are not subjected to the same
level of compaction as is deeper sediment in the long cores. The
consistency of the E13 inferred accumulation rate when compared with two
of the AMS dates from the V1 and V2 cores (Figure \ref{fig:amsRates})
are additional evidence of the varved nature of the sediment record.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/longcore_cumulative_depth_vs_estimated_year_w_ams_and_varve} 

}

\caption{Cumulative sediment accumulation rates for cores V1 and V2 using the median calibrated $^{14}$C AMS dates and lamanae couplet counting and thicknesses measurements. The error bars on the $^{14}$C dates are the two-sigma uncertainty range and the grey shading around the varve points is the 10\% counting error. Gaps between the varve chronology (points) denote periods that had indiscernable varves. The accumulation rate for the Ekman surficial core which has a maximum observed depth of 9 cm has been extrapolated using linear interpolation.}\label{fig:amsRates}
\end{figure}

By comparison with nearby lakes, accumulation rates in areas proximal to
river inputs in nearby Quesnel Lake were measured to be about 0.72 mm
yr\textsuperscript{-1} (see Figure 9 in \citet{Gilbert2012}). Sediment
inputs are expected to be lower in Quesnel Lake compared to Cariboo
Lake, with more arid and less glaciated portions of the Quesnel Lake
watershed contributing to that lower rate. The AMS accumulation rates of
1.76 \(\pm\) 0.05 mm yr\textsuperscript{-1} and 1.37 \(\pm\) 0.05 mm
yr\textsuperscript{-1} in Cariboo Lake are as expected for a smaller
watershed with a higher fraction of glacier cover compared to Quesnel
Lake. The AMS radiocarbon dates from samples V1 and V2 provide an
important control when interpreting the inferred temporal pattern of
sediment inputs to Cariboo Lake.

Three distinct sediment facies were observed in both V1 and V2:
discernible couplets, indiscernible couplets (disturbed facies) and
graded turbidite events. The similarity in couplet structure and
thickness between cores V1 and V2 and hydrology of Cariboo Lake strongly
suggested these are varves. This interpretation is also supported by the
two AMS radiocarbon dated samples from cores V1 and V2 which
corresponded reasonably well with the couplet count chronology at the
same depth (Figure \ref{fig:amsRates}). \textbf{Differences between the
two chronologies were expected due to uncertainties with couplet
counting and AMS radiocarbon dating}. The uncertainty of the laminae
counting method is inferred from Ekman surface cores by counting laminae
down to a common specified depth of 5 cm for three Ekman cores (E12,
E13, E14 - see Figure \ref{fig:map-lake} for locations proximal to V1
and V2). The Ekman laminae counting analysis resulted in an uncertainty
estimate of the counting method of about 10\% or 1 miscounted varve per
10 years. This counting error of 10\% is higher than the varve counting
error of 0.7\% in \citet{Menounos2008c} and 0.7-6\% in
\citet{Zolitschka1991}. In \citet{Menounos2008c} and
\citet{Zolitschka1991} varves were identified using thin sections and
may have contributed to a more accurate chronology. The varve contacts
observed in Cariboo Lake were strong and there is reasonable confidence
in counting. Missing varves may have occurred if spring high flows did
not deliver a coarse-grained laminae and false varves may occur if
multiple high flows are observed in a given year. However, the
consistent \textbf{spring} flows of this basin suggest multiple high
flow events are rare (Figure \ref{fig:cl-hydro}). This hypothesis is
also supported by Figure \ref{fig:amsRates} which shows a negative bias
of the varve chronology compared to the calibrated \textsuperscript{14}C
age-depth model and suggests that missing varves may be a larger source
of error than false varves.

Instantaneously deposited (event-based) turbidites were identified if
laminae/beds had D\textsubscript{50} grain size greater than 3 standard
deviations from the mean and/or thickness greater than 6 standard
deviations for V1 and 2 standard deviations for V2 from the mean. Figure
\ref{fig:varve-turb} examples show the difference in regular laminae
compared to an event-based turbidite bed. Turbidite beds observed in V1
and V2 were well defined and graded (see Figure \ref{fig:varve-turb},
d). These turbidite beds are similar in structure to those described in
\citet{sabatier2022} as originating from a flood, glacial lake outburst
flood, or delta collapse event. Since the Cariboo River upstream of
Cariboo Lake is filtered by headwater proglacial lakes, it is more
likely the turbidite beds at the distal V1 and V2 site are from
localized sidewall tributary floods. Collapse of the foreslope of an
oversteppened Cariboo delta is also possible.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/good_vs_flood_vs_disturbed_varves_} 

}

\caption{Photographs of the long core stratigraphy. A, Example of regular laminae from V1 at a depth of 360 cm. B, a graded event-based turbidite bed from V2 at a depth of 230 cm. Features labeled within this figure include: ‘a’ high flow spring/summer freshet laminae, ‘b’ low flow winter laminae, ‘c’  top of the turbidite bed, and ‘d’ the bottom of the turbidite bed. C, shows massive beds ‘e’ over more distict laminations ‘f’.\label{tab:varve-turb}}\label{fig:varve-turb}
\end{figure}

Where possible the thickness, grain size statistics, and percent organic
matter (OM) were analyzed for each event layer. The turbidite bed grain
size, OM, and thickness illustrates the high sediment flux during these
events compared to the regular, annually occurring couplets (Table
\ref{tab:turbTbl}). The composition of sediment grains within the
event-based layers were all characterized by a coarser single mode with
less than 0.01\% clay, over 98\% silt and less than 1\% sand. The grain
size distribution for the regular couplet sediments is characterized by
a bi-modal distribution with an average composition of 16\% clay, 83\%
silt, and less than 1\% sand. Figure \ref{fig:turbScatter} shows that
some event layers are coincident in time between V1 and V2. Since each
of the event-based layers contain sediment deposited over a single,
potentially localized event, they were removed from subsequent trend
analyses of varve thickness, grain size, and percent organics.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0676}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2703}}
  >{\raggedleft\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2838}}
  >{\raggedleft\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1486}}
  >{\raggedleft\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1216}}
  >{\raggedleft\arraybackslash}p{(\columnwidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1081}}@{}}
\caption{Sediment characteristics of regular laminae `Couplet (varve)'
compared to couplets classified as turbidite beds `Events' for V1 and
V2. The `Couplet (varve)' is the mean sediment characteristic for all
regular laminae couplets. The `Event mean' is the mean sediment
characteristic value for couplets classified as events, `Event sd' is
the standard deviation, and `Event n' is the number of turbidite
beds.\label{tab:turbTbl}}\tabularnewline
\toprule()
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
core
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
metric
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedleft
Couplet (varve) mean
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedleft
Event mean
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedleft
Event sd
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedleft
Event n
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule()
\endfirsthead
\toprule()
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
core
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
metric
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedleft
Couplet (varve) mean
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedleft
Event mean
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedleft
Event sd
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedleft
Event n
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule()
\endhead
V1 & D\textsubscript{50} (µm) & 7.64 & 9.68 & 0.80 & 5 \\
V2 & D\textsubscript{50} (µm) & 6.35 & 16.20 & 9.40 & 6 \\
V1 & OM (\%) & 4.75 & 4.67 & 0.53 & 3 \\
V2 & OM (\%) & 4.71 & 2.86 & 0.94 & 4 \\
V1 & Avg. Thickness (mm) & 2.39 & 10.32 & 4.24 & 5 \\
V2 & Avg. Thickness (mm) & 1.51 & 9.58 & 14.12 & 9 \\
\bottomrule()
\end{longtable}

The varve-based chronology is based on the counting of discernible
couplets with graded turbidite facies removed. Indiscernible couplets in
the disturbed-massive units makes interpreting the time elapsed over
each of these units difficult (see Figure \ref{fig:varve-turb} C). To
compensate for the depth intervals associated with the disturbed
sections, a 30-year moving average of sediment accumulation rates from
immediately above and below the disturbed sections were used to
interpolate accumulation rates over each facies (see method described in
Menounos et al., 2008). For core V1, laminae couplets were counted down
to a core depth of 343 cm, where the AMS radiocarbon organic material
was retrieved. This resulted in a V1 couplet-derived age estimated of
1419 \(\pm\) 142 varve BP compared to the two-sigma calibrated
\textsuperscript{14}C age range of 1820-1918 cal BP. For core V2 a date
of 1792 \(\pm\) 180 varve BP was estimated by couplet counting down to a
core depth of 281 cm which matches more closely with two-sigma
calibrated \textsuperscript{14}C age range of 1895-2043 cal BP. The
better alignment between the couplet counting age and the AMS derived
age in V2 can be attributed to the higher degree of core disturbance in
V1 compared to V2. Sections that had indiscernible couplets may have
resulted in some undercounting within core V1. \textbf{While there is
substantial uncertainty in both the varve counting and AMS radiocarbon
dating methods, the overlap in the uncertainty bounds in Figure
\ref{fig:amsRates} for V2 and general agreement between the two
chronologies for V1 suggests the laminae couples may be deposited
annually. Additional \textsuperscript{14}C analysis is required to
conclusively determine the couplets are varves, however the majority of
evidence presented here suggests this is the case.}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/turbidite_plot} 

}

\caption{Timing and Standardized Departures of turbidite thickness, grain size, and OM for V1 and V2. Year (CE) is the estimated year using linear interpolation from the AMS radiocarbon dates.\label{turbScatter}}\label{fig:turbScatter}
\end{figure}

The basal age for each core is estimated using both the varve counting
method and using a linear interpolation to extrapolate the
\textsuperscript{14}C chronology. The basal age of V1 at 378 cm is
approximately 1537 \(\pm\) 154 varve yr BP based on the varve chronology
and the two-sigma calibrated \textsuperscript{14}C range is 2016-2124
cal BP. The basal age of V2 at 282 cm is about 1797 \(\pm\) 180 varve yr
BP based on the varve chronology and the two-sigma calibrated
\textsuperscript{14}C range is 1902-2051 cal BP. \textbf{The closer
alignment of the \textsuperscript{14}C} and varve chronology at V2 gives
greater confidence in the V2 age model used for reconstructing the
timing of Holocene sedimentation patterns for this core. Since V1 has a
greater spread between the two chronologies, there is less confidence in
the chronology of this core. However, given the physical mechanisms that
control sedimentation in Cariboo Lake it is likely both cores primarily
contain couplets that are deposited annually.

\hypertarget{sediment-laminae-statistics}{%
\subsubsection{Sediment Laminae
Statistics}\label{sediment-laminae-statistics}}

A time series of varve thickness (as standardized departures) is
presented in Figure \ref{fig:varves-a}, using only discernible couplets.
Event-based turbidites have been removed and indiscernible facies are
represented as gaps. The chronology for this time series was derived
using a linear interpolation from the median calibrated
\textsuperscript{14}C date of each core (Table \ref{tab:amsDates}). The
mean varve thickness for V1 is 2.4 mm and for V2 is 1.5 mm. Thicker
varves are expected at V1 due to its closer proximity to the Cariboo
River delta. This is also supported by the thicker varves observed in
core E11 (proximal to V1) compared to E13 (proximal to V2) of 2.8 mm to
2.0 mm respectively. The time series of varve thickness measured from V1
and V2 illustrates trends in suspended sediment delivery to Cariboo Lake
(Figure \ref{fig:varves-a}). The measured couplet thicknesses in the two
cores are plotted as standardized departures to facilitate comparison
between the two cores. In each plot a 30-year moving average with a
1-year time step is plotted in black to emphasize decadal to centennial
patterns in accumulation rate departures. The 30-year average varve
thickness \textbf{are largely} above average from 0 to 750 CE, for both
V1 and V2, with a stronger signal observed for V1 which is closer to the
main Cariboo River outlet. Below average varve thickness is observed at
both V1 and V2 from 750-1600 CE. After 1600 CE, trends in varve
thickness between the two cores depart, with V2 above average during the
Little Ice Age and V1 remains below average. Sub-centennial trends are
not reported due to the coarse temporal control for both V1 and V2.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/V1_V2_varvethickness_vs_depth_and_C14_est_yr_ma} 

}

\caption{Standardized departure from the mean varve thickness (VT) for cores V1 and V2. Events are removed from the record and disturbed facies are shown as blank gaps in the record. The gap width of disturbed facies was calculated using a linear interpolation from the AMS radiocarbon dates. The gray lines represent measured varve thickness at couplet (annual) resolution where available, the black line is a 30-year moving average. Gaps correspond to portions of the core that did not have discernible varves. The bottom axes, labeled Year (CE), was estimated using linear interpolation from the median calibrated $^{14}$C age. Laminae counting in V1 was not possible beyond the estimated date of 1900 CE and beyond 1970 CE in V2. The black X's on the bottom graph of V1 and V2 denote the AMS radiocarbon age and depth of the respective sample.\label{varves-a}}\label{fig:varves-a}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{grain-size}{%
\paragraph{Grain Size}\label{grain-size}}

The mean D\textsubscript{50} grain size is 7.6 \(\pm\) 0.01 µm at V1
compared to 6.3 \(\pm\) 0.01 µm at V2. The larger grain size and varve
thickness at V1 compared to V2 is consistent with the spatial trends in
sediment delivery observed from the Ekman cores. While based on a
limited number of measurements compared to the varve thickness analysis,
the temporal pattern in standardized departures of D\textsubscript{50}
grain size between the two cores shows a consistent pattern (Figure
\ref{fig:particle}). Both V1 and V2 have above average grain size
between 0 to 700 CE and below average from 700 to 1500 CE. After 1500
CE, grain size follows an increasing trend with average to above average
grain size. V1 shows an earlier increase in grain size compared to V2.
While couplet thickness does not increase substantially over the LIA
interval, gain size does. Overall, grain size fluctuations at a temporal
resolution of about 100-years shows good correspondence between the two
cores over the last 2000 years.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/V1_V2_grainsize_vs_depth_and_C14_est_yr} 

}

\caption{Standardized departure from the mean D~50~ grain size for cores V1 and V2. The black points represent $D_{50}$ grain size at 5 - 10 cm intervals and the gray line is the 3 sample (125 year) moving average. The top axes, labeled Year (CE), was estimated using linear interpolation from the median calibrated $^{14}$C age. The black X's on the bottom graph of V1 and V2 denote the AMS radiocarbon age and depth of the respective sample.\label{particle}}\label{fig:particle}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{organic-matter}{%
\paragraph{Organic Matter}\label{organic-matter}}

The average percent organic matter (OM) at V1 and V2 is similar at
4.76\% and 4.80\%, respectively, suggesting that the flux of
allochthonous organic material to the core locations is not dependent on
distance from the main Cariboo River as it is easily transported through
the lake due to low density. This is also supported by the Ekman OM
spatial analysis, where a systematic down-lake relationship was not
observed (Figure \ref{fig:ekmanSeds}, C). Figure \ref{fig:loi} shows the
percent OM for both V1 and V2. Higher levels of organic content are
shown in V1 and V2 from 0-1000 CE and mostly below average from
1000-2000 CE. Specific periods of above average OM for V1 occur around
CE 50-500, 650-1150, around 1300 and 1750-1850. OM in V2 matches above
average values in the interval CE 250-550 and 650-950.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/V1_V2_LOI_vs_depth_and_C14_est_yr} 

}

\caption{Standardized departure from the mean percent organic matter (OM) for cores V1 and V2. The black points represent percent OM at 2.5 - 5 cm intervals and the gray line is the 3 sample (75 year) moving average. The top axes, labelelled Year (CE), was estimated using linear interpolation from the median calibrated $^{14}$C age. The black X's on the bottom graph of V1 and V2 denote the AMS radiocarbon age and depth of the respective sample.\label{loi}}\label{fig:loi}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{discussion}{%
\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}}

Cariboo Lake was selected to test the utility of moderate sized
glacier-fed lakes as archives of accessible long-term and
high-resolution sediment input variability. Evidence of late Pleistocene
deglaciation in the Cariboo Lake region is provided by coarse temporal
resolution sub-bottom acoustic results. A maximum deglacial sediment
thickness of \textasciitilde35 m puts Cariboo Lake in the middle to
lower range of Holocene sediment inputs in Canadian Cordilleran lakes
\citep[see detailed discussion in][]{Gilbert2012}. The study of smaller
Mud Lake, in the Rocky Mountains to the east of Cariboo Lake (Figure
\ref{fig:map-basin} -- inset) was evaluated by \citet{Hodder2006b}, who
found the early phases of deglaciation and lake sediment infill started
just prior to 9.6 ka BP. \citet{Gilbert2012} indicate deglaciation of
the north and west arms of nearby Quesnel Lake was likely complete by
8.6 ka BP. \textbf{\citet{Menounos2017} describe substantial loss of the
Cordilleran Ice Sheet across western Canada as early as 14.0 ka BP}. The
Cariboo Lake acoustic results contribute to this regional record however
the inferred bottom dates present uncertainty in the actual timing.

Unlike many other deglacial sediment packages in Canadian Cordilleran
lakes, the sediment infill in Cariboo Lake has been subject to deep
trenching during deglaciation and the early Holocene (Figure 3c). The
troughs, with sediment infills occurring at different times, suggest the
presence of highly erosive but intermittent bottom currents during
deglaciation and \textbf{possibly} into the earliest Holocene. Energetic
flow of cold sediment-rich meltwater flow would be required suggesting
proximity of an actively retreating valley glacier. The absence of lower
elevations moraines in the valley upstream of Cariboo Lake might
indicate rapidly retreating ice into headwater locations. However, in
general, moraines indicative of stagnant ice fronts in lower elevation
settings are not common elsewhere throughout much of the eastern
Cordillera suggesting that valley glacier development was limited
\citep{Menounos2017}.

In contemporary ice-proximal lakes with extensive coverage of active
glaciers, high accumulation rates have been observed to be between 0.5 m
yr\textsuperscript{-1} \citep{Crookshanks2008} and as high as 1 m
yr\textsuperscript{-1} \citep{Gilbert1997}. Similar high accumulation
rates in the late-glacial are inferred to have occurred in Quesnel Lake
\citep{Gilbert2012}, resulting in a thick pre-Holocene sediment package.
This evidence for high pre/early Holocene accumulation rates in Quesnel
Lake from large dynamic glaciers suggests that high accumulation rates
are also likely for Cariboo Lake during this time and is supported by
the acoustic data presented here.

Two transects of sub-bottom acoustic records analyzed within Cariboo
Lake provide evidence of high sediment accumulation rates during the
early Holocene. Sub-bottom acoustic records from Transect B, which is
proximal to the V1 core, indicate an upward transition from
massive-unlayered (Facies A) to well-layered sediments (Facies B) at a
depth of about 20 m (Figure \ref{fig:acoustics}). Assuming a maximum
Holocene sediment accumulation rate of approximately 1.9 mm
yr\textsuperscript{-1} from V1, this would put this transition at about
10.5 ka BP. Transect C, is located in between cores V1 and V2, shows the
transition of Facies A to B occurring at a depth of around 15 m (Figure
\ref{fig:acoustics}). Using a combined V1 and V2 average Holocene
sediment accumulation rate of 1.7 mm yr\textsuperscript{-1} in this
region of the lake, puts the transition from Facies A to B at around 9
ka BP for Transect C, slightly later than the Transect B estimate. The
massive structure of Facies A is inferred to be due to high rates of
sediment delivery as glaciers retreated upvalley during the early
Holocene after the formation of the deep trenches. The well-layered
sediment of Facies B, along with the continuation of laminae couplets
observed in cores V1 and V2 over the last 2 ka, suggests that glaciers
reduced in extent at the start of the Holocene but did not disappear
completely. It is possible during this transition from Facies A to B,
glaciers retreated above Lanezi Lake resulting in more sediment
filtering and thus a reduction in sediment delivery and the beginning of
seasonally derived laminae couplet formation within Cariboo Lake.

\textbf{Prior to the Neoglacial, sediment accumulation rates are
generally lower across western Canada due to reduced glacier extent and
warm temperatures
\citep{Steinman2019, Menounos2004, Koch2007a, Osborn2007, Luckman1988, Luckman1993}.
Therefore, the estimated basal ages of Facies A and B, determined from
from sedimentation accumulation rates over the last 2 ka from the long
cores presented here, may be much older if the actual sedimentation
rates were slower as well.} The timing of the transition between these
two facies is similar to the onset of deglaciation and start of the
Holocene sediment package within Mud Lake, BC \citep{Hodder2006b} around
9.6 ka BP, at Moose Lake, BC \citep{Desloges1999} around 10.3 ka BP, at
Quesnel Lake, BC \citep{Gilbert2012} around 8.6 ka BP, and at the Upper
Bow River, AB \citep{Leonard1999} around 11.7 ka BP. Warming in the
early Holocene, around 9.10-6.70 ka BP in the \textbf{Canadian Rockies},
specifically, \citep{Luckman1986} and British Columbia, generally,
\citep{Clague1989, Steinman2019} led to two possible sedimentation
regimes. Where glaciers persist \textbf{in the Canadian Rockies through
the warm period} resulting in more regular seasonality of sediment
inputs and laminae couplet formation \citep[e.g.~Mud
Lake,][]{Hodder2006b} and where glaciers disappear during the warm
period, leading to much lower accumulation and seasonality
\citep[e.g.~Moose Lake,][]{Desloges1999}.

Records of sub-bottom acoustic records from Cariboo Lake present coarse
temporal scale resolution of continuous sedimentation accumulation rates
throughout the Holocene. Higher resolution AMS dated sediments from the
much thinner sediment package in the west arm of Quesnel Lake, located
in the Cariboo Mountains (Figure \ref{fig:map-basin}), also showed a
very consistent mean rate of sedimentation throughout the entire
Holocene \citep{Gilbert2012}. Contrasting somewhat from this pattern are
results from \citet{Menounos2004} and \citet{Desloges1999} who note that
early to mid-Holocene sediment accumulation rates in the southeastern
Canadian Cordillera were lower than the late-Holocene Neoglacial period.
However, those shifts come from watersheds with much higher percentages
of glacier ice cover (\textasciitilde15-40\%) coupled with the probable
disappearance of glaciers during the warmer hypsithermal.
\textbf{Therefore}, any extrapolation of timing to the \textbf{entire
Holocene} sediment record of Cariboo Lake remains speculative.

Sediment inputs to Cariboo Lake are mainly delivered via the Cariboo
River delta and thus changes in the whole of the Cariboo Lake watershed
\textbf{would be expected} to be important. In contrast, inputs of
sediment from the small tributary watersheds that boarder Cariboo Lake
are controlled by more localized, watershed-specific responses. Although
coarser grained sediments from discrete turbidite flows are found
proximal to sidewall tributary deltas (Figure \ref{fig:ekmanSeds}), they
are only transferred to deep lake deposits during episodic events
(Figure \ref{fig:turbScatter}). \textbf{After removal of instantaneous
turbidites, the long core sediment records are thought to be most
representative of watershed wide trends in river discharge influenced by
temperature and precipitation rather than isolated events and inputs
from nearby tributaries and hillslopes.} The long core (V1 and V2)
sediment is composed of nearly 99\% silt and clay resulting in laminae
couplets that are inferred to have been delivered via suspended sediment
from the main Cariboo River. Therefore, trends observed in sediment
accumulation at cores V1 and V2 likely best represent waterside-wide
climate and glacier activity.

While cores V1 and V2 do not produce identical results, it is likely the
sediment yield data from these cores are within the range of 7-21\%
error reported in Evans and Church (2000) for other alpine lakes in
British Columbia. The inferred error of cores V1 and V2 is attributed to
the spatial heterogeneity of sediment accumulation across the Cariboo
Lake and is likely on the lower end of this error range due to its
simple basin morphology. Retrieving more than two good long core
sedimentary sequences, could have provided a better estimate in the
error of sediment accumulation, however, the logistical demands of
retrieving more cores prevented this.

There is a documented range of late Holocene clastic sediment
accumulation rates in glacier-fed lakes from across the Canadian
Cordillera. Highest rates of \textgreater{} 2 cm/yr are observed in
ice-contact to ice-proximal lakes of various sizes
\citep{Desloges1994, Crookshanks2008}, to relatively low rates of
\textless{} 1 mm yr\textsuperscript{-1} \citep{Gilbert2012}. The range
in accumulation rates has been understood to be a result in the
variability of sediment production from glacier processes, the steepness
of topography \citep{Ballantyne2002}, the persistence of ice cover and
the degree of basin connectivity enhancing or impeding delivery of
sediment down valley \citep{Wohl2019}.

In the Cariboo Lake basin, the combination of upper watershed area,
intervening storage, glacier cover and lake size are considered optimal
during this period for the relatively consistent formation of clastic
varves. The Cariboo River has two main tributaries, the Upper Cariboo
River and the Matthew River which are connected to high alpine peaks and
glaciers providing a significant source of sediment (see Figure 2).
Lanezi, Sandy and Ghost lakes act as sediment traps eliminating the
transfer of coarse sediment and limiting the transfer of finer sediment
from the glacier sediment production zones. This results in sediment
accumulation rates that are on the low-end for the southeastern
Cordillera \citep{Hodder2006b}. Although connectivity is limited, there
are sufficient seasonal contrasts in suspended sediment flux to produce
couplets (annual varves) in the main basin of Cariboo Lake over the last
two millennia. This is unlike the west arm of Quesnel Lake where
sediment rates are 2 to 3 times lower due to significant storage in the
much larger upper watershed.

Lake sediment chronologies typically vary in their sensitivity to
regional fluctuations in temperature and precipitation, from annual
resolution in lakes with higher accumulation rates
\citep[e.g.][]{Menounos2008c} to centennial-scale in lakes with low
accumulation rates \citep[e.g.][]{Desloges1999}. Figure
\ref{fig:proxy-comparison}a shows the (inferred) varve thickness
chronology reconstructed as standardized departures from cores V1 and
V2. There is a significant amount of noise in the record, typical of a
filtered sediment transport system \citep[e.g.][]{Jerolmack2010}, so a
lower resolution 30-year moving average is superimposed on the raw
couplet thickness data in Figure \ref{fig:proxy-comparison}a. Figure
\ref{fig:proxy-comparison}b and \ref{fig:proxy-comparison}c show the
lower-resolution temporal patterns in D\textsubscript{50} grain size and
organic matter content, respectively. These trends are compared against
the \citet{Moberg2005} regional climate proxy re-analysis for the
northern hemisphere (Figure \ref{fig:proxy-comparison}d),
\citet{Solomina2016} western Canada peak glacier extent estimates
(Figure \ref{fig:proxy-comparison}e), and \citet{Ljungqvist2016}
hydroclimate anomaly estimates for the northern hemisphere (Figure
\ref{fig:proxy-comparison}f). Most of these are at resolutions of
centennial scale or lower.

\textbf{For Cariboo Lake, above average varve thickness, grain size, and
organic matter are observed for both V1 and V2 from 2.0-1.3 ka BP. In
the southern Coast Mountains of British Columbia
\citep{Koch2007a, Osborn2007, Allen2007, Clague2010} and in the Interior
ranges and Rocky Mountains \citep{Luckman1993, Luckman1995} glaciers
were generally more extensive prior to 2.0 ka BP than present day. More
recently than 2.0 ka BP, there is evidence of the First Millennium
Advance (FMA) primarily from the Coast Mountains
\citep{Reyes2006, Osborn2007} with more recent evidence emerging from
the Interior Ranges \citep{Maurer2012b}. These results cover a range of
advance dates between 1.80 and 1.30 ka BP. The increase in sediment
production and sediment availability due to extensive glacier advance
and then retreat from the FMA may be reflected here by the increase in
varve thickness and grain size in the Cariboo Lake record (Figure
\ref{fig:proxy-comparison}). Observations of an increase in clastic
sedimentation rates in the Rocky Mountains were also observed around 1.8
ka BP in Hector Lake \citep{Leonard1997}. \citet{Maurer2012b} show that
the Castle Creek Glacier intermittently advanced into On-off Lake and
over the Cariboo River watershed divide throughout the late-Holocene
between 2.73-2.35, 1.87-1.72, and 1.53-1.42 ka BP (Figure
\ref{fig:proxy-comparison}). Additional contributions of sediment from
the Castle Creek Glacier would help contribute to above average varve
thickness and grain size observed in Cariboo Lake from 2.0-1.3 ka BP.
However, the above average organic matter observed in Figure
\ref{fig:proxy-comparison} is atypical during an increase of clastic
sediment delivery but could be explained by some contributions from
increased soil erosion below treeline during a time of higher
precipitation rates and subsequent high spring freshet flows.}

\textbf{The coarsening trend of grain size from 750-1000 CE in Cariboo
Lake is consistent with evidence of an early Little Ice Age (LIA)
glacier advance centering around 1250 CE in the Canadian Rockies
\citep{Luckman1995, Osborn2001, Leonard1997}, in the Cariboo Lake basin
around 1040-1160 CE \citep{Maurer2012b}, and more broadly across western
Canada around 1100 CE \citep{Solomina2016} (Figure
\ref{fig:proxy-comparison}, D). This period of increased glacier
activity also corresponds with the highest temperature anomaly of the
Northern Hemisphere MCA \citep{Moberg2005} (Figure
\ref{fig:proxy-comparison}). However, \citet{Ljungqvist2016} estimate
precipitation to be above average around this time which could have
contributed to an increase in glacier extent if corresponding
temperatures were low enough. \citet{Steinman2012} studied two lakes in
northern Washington, USA which also support above average precipitation
for this region during the MCA. Although temperatures are reported as
slightly above average during the MCA \citep{Moberg2005} for the
Northern Hemisphere, the increase in glacier activity during this time
may have been a result of increased winter precipitation which may have
lowered the ELA of glaciers in the Cariboo Lake basin.}

\textbf{The second glacier advance of the LIA, which centers around 1850
CE in the Canadian Rockies \citep{Luckman2000g, Leonard1997} coincides
with thicker and coarser varves, and a reduction in organic matter in
Cariboo Lake (Figure \ref{fig:proxy-comparison}). The change in varve
thickness, grain size, and organic matter begins earlier for V1 at
around 1750 CE compared to V2 which begins to change around 1825 CE. The
discrepancy in the sediment characteristic trends between the two cores
is considered small given the uncertainty in couplet counting. Overall,
the response of varve thickness, grain size, and organic matter to the
second advance of the LIA around 1850 CE exhibits a stronger response
compared to earlier phases of the LIA.}

\textbf{Temperature anomalies for the Northern Hemisphere reported by
\citet{Moberg2005}, are also most negative from 1500-1750 CE. The dryer
conditions reported by \citet{Steinman2012} from 1600-1900 CE, 500 km
south of Cariboo Lake in Castor and Lime Lakes could be attributed to a
strong negative temperature anomaly. These records suggest there was a
strong influence of the LIA climate on glacier activity in the region
compared to the rest of the 2 ka record. Following the LIA, around 2000
CE a dramatic decline in organic matter and increase in grain size is
observed suggestive of high magnitude clastic sediment delivery. This
could be attributed to the increase of sediment availability as glaciers
retreated more rapidly from LIA extents and exposed stores of clastic
sediments \citep{Beedle2015}. As glaciers declined from peak LIA extents
around 1850 CE \citep{Leonard1997, Luckman2000g}, an increase in soil
development, vegetation growth and subsequent bank stability is expected
which may also contribute to a decline in OM as organic content is
stored as needleleaf coniferous forest. However, hydraulic mining
practices during the Cariboo Gold Rush and deforestation began during
the late 1800s and they also may have contributed to this rapid increase
of clastic sediments. Human disturbance related controls on sediment
inputs for the last 100 years or more are known to confound the
climate-glacier-sediment output signal \citep{Beedle2015}.}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{figs/all_core_stats_2k_anomalies} 

}

\caption{Cariboo Lake sediment characteristics for cores V1 (purple) and V2 (green) and Northern Hemisphere (NH) climate proxies. A, is the standardized departure (Sd. Dept.) from the mean varve thickness (VT) for annual couplets (light colour) and 30-year moving average (dark lines). B, is the standardized departure from the mean percent organic matter (OM) for cores V1 and V2. The coloured dots represent percent OM at 2.5 - 5 cm intervals and the coloured lines are the 3 sample (75 year) moving average. C, is the standardized departure from the mean $D_{50}$ grain size, the coloured dots represent $D_{50}$ grain size at 5 - 10 cm intervals and the coloured lines are the 3 sample (125 year) moving average. D, Solomina et al. (2016) reconstructed relative glacier extent in western North America (black line), expansion of the Castle Creek glacier (blue bars, Maurer et al., 2012), and periods of peak glacier extent in western Canada (gray bars, Solomina et al., 2016). E, Moberg et al. (2005) Nothern Hemisphere annual temperature anomaly from the 1961-1990 mean, the orange line is the full reconstruction from high and low frequency proxies, and the black line is the low frequency proxy component with upper and lower uncertainty marked by dashed blue lines. MCA is the Medieval Climatic Anomaly and LIA is the Little Ice Age. F, Ljungqvist et al. (2016) Nothern Hemisphere hydroclimate variability, expressed as standardized unitless anomalies ranging from -2 to 2, relative to the centennial mean and standard deviation over the eleventh-nineteenth centuries (see methods in Ljungqvist et al. 2016).}\label{fig:proxy-comparison}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{conclusions}{%
\section{Conclusions}\label{conclusions}}

The moderated-sized Cariboo Lake provides a record of deglacial and
Holocene sediment inputs for central British Columbia. The steep
climatic gradient from the wetter, glacier covered, headwaters to the
semi-arid, lower elevation zones of the lake, result in sediment input
via the main Cariboo Lake delta that is predominately derived from the
glacier production zone. This conclusion is supported by the down-lake
trends observed in grain-size and organic matter content. The smaller
alluvial-fan deltas from side tributaries appear to be paraglacial relic
features, similar to those described in \citet{Church1972}, and likely
formed during deglaciation and the earliest Holocene as no evidence of
significant inputs during the Holocene were found in this study.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Sub-bottom acoustic records provide a coarse temporal resolution
  chronology of early and mid-Holocene sediment accumulation. The
  transition from massive to acoustically well-layered sediments is
  estimated to have occurred around 10.5 to 9 ka BP. There is
  uncertainty with the timing of this transition as sediment
  accumulation rates have been extrapolated from the 2 ka old sediment
  cores. \textbf{If correct}, the 10.5 to 9 ka BP transition is similar
  to other glacier, lake and climate records across British Columbia and
  Alberta suggesting fairly consistent and rapid withdrawal of
  valley-bottom glacier ice into higher elevation zones.
\item
  If trends observed in other southern Canadian Cordilleran lakes
  prevail, the early and mid-Holocene input of sediment during the
  hypsithermal would have been significantly reduced resulting in a
  Holocene sediment package within the 10-15 m range. Acoustic Facies B
  most likely represents this unit. \textbf{There were limitations in
  the ability to retrieve sufficiently long cores (\textgreater{} 10-15
  m), to confirm this transition of early Holocene to mid-Holocene
  hypsithermal sedimentary environment observed in the acoustic data.}
\item
  Sedimentary structures in the long cores indicated sediment delivery,
  over the late Holocene to present, is dominated by similar fractions
  of silt (spring freshet) and clay (winter settling) resulting in the
  formation of rhythmically laminated couplets that are mainly varves.
  The fraction of fine clastic sediments observed in the Cariboo Lake
  cores is high compared to other lakes in the Canadian Cordillera which
  typically have a larger fraction of coarse sediment from more frequent
  fall or spring high flows.
\item
  \textbf{The physical mechanisms observed in Cariboo Lake and the good
  agreement between the laminae counting and AMS chronology for core V2
  suggests the couplets are varves. However, additional data is required
  to confirm this.} While it is not possible to develop a chronology
  that provides a precisely dated high-resolution sediment yield record
  over the last 2 ka. The observed mean accumulation rate (1.6 mm
  yr\textsuperscript{-1}), the variance in accumulation rates and the
  low-frequency trends are important indicators of late Holocene
  environmental change.
\item
  Periods of peak glacier extent, such as during the First Millennial
  Advance (\textasciitilde200 to 700 CE) and Little Ice Age
  (\textasciitilde1600 to 1900 CE) are best correlated with grain size
  in Cariboo Lake. The trends in varve thickness were not as strong but
  still help confirm trends observed in grain size. Organic matter
  content is the least correlated with the other sediment metrics and
  may be more sensitive to vegetation changes in the basin. We conclude
  that sediment accumulation in Cariboo Lake was more sensitive to
  glacier activity and sediment production during the LIA compared to
  earlier advances.
\item
  The greatest deviation in varve thickness, grain size, and organic
  matter above normal occurs after 1860 CE and may be related to climate
  warming following the LIA. However, there are complications in this
  watershed via large-scale mining proximal to the lake and some upper
  watershed deforestation. These land-use and land-cover changes may
  have also been contributing factors to an increase in sediment
  delivery to the lake.
\item
  Upstream filtering and storage of glacier eroded sediment may reduce
  the strength of the climate-sediment signal for Cariboo Lake. However,
  there is ample evidence that the sediment record spanning the last
  2000 years gives better temporal resolution of watershed dynamics
  compared to other available records in the Interior Ranges of British
  Columbia. While the results presented here broadly agree with the
  primary glacier advances over the past 2000 years, further study of
  the laminated Cariboo Lake sediment record is required to improve the
  \textbf{sediment record chronology and} determine the exact timing and
  importance (i.e.~signal strength) of sediment inputs related to shifts
  of climate and glacier activity across of the southeastern Canadian
  Cordillera.
\end{enumerate}

\pagebreak

\hypertarget{acknowledgements}{%
\section{Acknowledgements}\label{acknowledgements}}

We thank Michael Allchin, Laszlo Enyedy, and Caitlin Langford at the
Quesnel River Research Centre for assistance in field. Brian Menounos
kindly provided access to vibra-coring equipment. Mike Gorton, George
Kretschmann, Anna Soleski and Selina Amaral provided assistance with lab
analysis of sediment samples. Funding was provided by the University of
Toronto.

\pagebreak

\hypertarget{supplementary-information}{%
\section{Supplementary Information}\label{supplementary-information}}

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}rrr@{}}
\caption{Counting error statistics from three Ekman short cores.
\label{tab:ekErr}}\tabularnewline
\toprule()
Core ID & Depth (cm) & Couplet Count \\
\midrule()
\endfirsthead
\toprule()
Core ID & Depth (cm) & Couplet Count \\
\midrule()
\endhead
12 & 5 & 10 \\
13 & 5 & 12 \\
14 & 5 & 12 \\
\bottomrule()
\end{longtable}

\bibliographystyle{sageh}
\bibliography{../../../local-usask/papers/bibtex/library.bib}


\end{document}
